Add mlflow otel traces blog (#395)
mlflow/mlflow-website: website/blog/2025-11-05-opentelemetry-tracing-support/index.md

---
title: Full OpenTelemetry Support in MLflow Tracing
description: MLflow 3.6.0 brings comprehensive OpenTelemetry integration for unified observability
slug: opentelemetry-tracing-support
authors: [mlflow-maintainers]
tags: [tracing, opentelemetry, genai, mlops]
thumbnail: /img/blog/mlflow-opentelemetry-thumbnail.png
image: /img/blog/mlflow-opentelemetry-thumbnail.png
---

> We're excited to announce that MLflow 3.6.0 brings **full OpenTelemetry support** to the open-source MLflow server. This integration represents a major step forward in making MLflow a **vendor-neutral, standards-based observability platform** for GenAI applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're excited to announce that MLflow 3.6.0 brings **full OpenTelemetry support** to the open-source MLflow server. This integration represents a major step forward in making MLflow a **vendor-neutral observability platform** for GenAI applications.
```

nit: sounds a bit repetitive

<img
src={require("./hero.png").default}
alt="MLflow OpenTelemetry Hero"
width="100%"
/>

## What's New?

MLflow has always been committed to providing powerful tracing capabilities for GenAI applications. With the addition of comprehensive OpenTelemetry integration, you can now:

- **Create unified traces** that combine MLflow SDK instrumentation with OpenTelemetry auto-instrumentation from third-party libraries
- **Ingest OTLP spans** directly into the MLflow tracking server

> - **Seamlessly integrate** with existing OTel-instrumented applications without vendor lock-in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Seamlessly integrate** with existing applications that are instrumented with OpenTelemetry
```

overusing `foo-bar` format can be seen as a sign of AI generated contents. Can we reduce the usage throughout the page?

> - **Visualize traces** from industry-standard OTel libraries with proper attribute translation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Choose Arbitrary Languages** for your AI applications and trace them, including Java, Go, Rust, and more.
```

    endpoint=f"{mlflow_server_uri}/v1/traces",
    headers={
        "Content-Type": "application/x-protobuf",
        "x-mlflow-experiment-id": experiment_id,
    }
)

# Set up the tracer provider
provider = TracerProvider()
provider.add_span_processor(BatchSpanProcessor(otlp_exporter))
trace.set_tracer_provider(provider)

# Now any OpenTelemetry instrumentation will send traces to MLflow
tracer = trace.get_tracer(__name__)

with tracer.start_as_current_span("my_operation"):
    # Your application code here
    pass
```

#### Environment Variable Configuration

For applications written in other languages (Java, Go, Rust, etc.) or when you prefer configuration via environment variables, set the following:

```bash
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_ENDPOINT=http://localhost:5000/v1/traces
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_HEADERS=x-mlflow-experiment-id=123
```

This approach works with any OpenTelemetry SDK and allows you to trace applications across your entire technology stack, sending all traces to MLflow for unified observability.

<img
src={require("./otel_trace.png").default}
alt="OpenTelemetry and MLflow Trace"
width="100%"
/>

## Unified Observability Across Your Stack

> With MLflow 3.6.0, you can now instrument your FastAPI application with OpenTelemetry auto-instrumentation and use MLflow's auto-tracing or `@trace` decorator, they'll work together to create a **single, unified trace**. This gives you complete visibility across your entire application stack—from HTTP requests to LLM calls to database queries.

Reviewer: Let's rephrase this not to focus too much on FastAPI. It is one example.
